How would you feel
if you received an invitation
to attend the next class of Gilead School?
For many, it has been
a lifelong dream to attend Gilead.
The course helps students
keep “a tight grip on the word of life.”
For others, the idea of five months
of intense study seems intimidating.
We know we need to study,
but we may find
it a challenge to get the most
out of the time we spend
reading God’s Word.
In this program, we will discuss
why study is so important,
what it means to study something,
and how you can get more
from your study sessions.
Since most cannot attend Gilead,
we will demonstrate
the method used in Gilead School.
First, why is study so important?
Only by study can we
keep “a tight grip on the word of life.”
When the apostle Paul penned these words,
he was imprisoned and nearing the end
of his action-packed life.
He had been the “apostle to the nations”
and had spent his best years
taking the Word of God
to the then-known world.
As he reflected on the fruits of his labors,
he wrote a letter to his friends
in the congregation in Philippi in Macedonia.
Inspired by holy spirit, he wrote words
that would aid his brothers
to gain the prize of eternal life.
These words are found
at Philippians 2:15, 16.
Let’s read them:
“So that you may come to be
blameless and innocent,
“children of God
without a blemish in the midst
“of a crooked and twisted generation,
“among whom you are shining
as illuminators in the world,
keeping a tight grip on the word of life.”
Imagine the joy Paul felt
when he was reunited
in the heavenly resurrection
with those who listened to his admonition
to keep “a tight grip on the word of life”!
Whether we have
the heavenly or earthly hope,
Paul’s words can help us gain
the prize of eternal life.
They imprint on our hearts and minds
a basic exhortation
that will lead us through these last days
and into our everlasting reward.
The question is, Will we remain
‘blameless and without blemish
in the midst of this crooked
and twisted generation’ of our day?
Will we rejoice with other faithful servants
of God in the new world?
We can and we will
if we take to heart Paul’s counsel
to keep “a tight grip on the word of life.”
Next, what does it mean to study?
Stop and contemplate this word picture
for keeping a tight grip.
Imagine a hiker who has slipped near a ledge.
But before falling over the cliff,
he grabs hold of a tree branch.
How tight do you think
his grip will be on that branch?
This is not a halfhearted effort.
Likewise, keeping a tight grip
on the word of life
is not just a mechanical routine,
nor is it a casual habit.
It requires strenuous effort.
It involves actively living
by the truths in God’s Word.
To do this, we must understand
more than what God
expressly commands and condemns.
We must be able to identify principles,
or life lessons, contained in the Bible.
Once identified, we must understand
how to match these valuable truths
to specific situations in our lives.
Then we must allow these principles
to influence our decisions
and guide our reaction
to trials and temptations.
Ask yourself,
‘How strong is my grip
on the word of life?’
To answer that,
let’s consider
the fundamentals of Bible study.
This is not about old methods or new methods,
nor is it about what device you are using.
This discussion transcends devices.
Study requires active thinking.
In a world of increasing distractions,
this is becoming an even greater challenge.
We’ve often received instant information
that enables us to quickly recite facts,
but this is not the same as active thinking.
Through active thinking,
we draw meaningful conclusions in our hearts.
We are certainly grateful
for all the study tools we’ve been given.
We should use these to the full.
At the same time, we need to be careful
that these tools do not cause us
to develop mental laziness.
Devices can help us to access information,
but they can’t think for us.
We must work hard if we are
to develop new patterns of thinking.
For example, if we study
The Watchtower on a device,
we can use the hyperlink feature
to read the Scriptures.
With a simple touch,
we quickly find and read the verse.
That is good!
If you regularly do this,
you get a grip on the word of life.
But would you like to get
a tight grip on the word of life?
To get a tight grip requires more effort
than a swipe of a finger
and then swiftly moving on.
You need to slow down
and analyze the material.
Only then will the information you study
become imprinted on your mind and heart,
leaving a clear and distinct impression.
How, then, can I get more out of my study?
Let’s demonstrate a method
taught during Gilead School.
It involves the use of six questions.
The following poem, written
by English journalist Rudyard Kipling,
can help guide better thinking:
“I keep six honest serving-men
“(They taught me all I knew);
“Their names are What and Why
“and When and How
and Where and Who.”
When studying God’s Word,
ask yourself these questions
and then do research in our publications
to get the facts
and discern the spiritual lessons.
To illustrate how to do this,
let’s open our Bibles to Genesis chapter 49
and look at verses 22 through 25.
First, we ask the when and where.
Now, with some research,
we learn that Jacob
spoke these words near the end of his life.
He was in Egypt,
but what he described
takes us back to Canaan some 40 years
when his son Joseph was a young man.
Now we have
a clearer picture of these verses.
So now, let’s read and analyze verse 22:
“Joseph is the offshoot of a fruitful tree,
a fruitful tree by a spring,
whose branches extend over the wall.”
“The offshoot of a fruitful tree.”
Who is the “fruitful tree”?
It is Joseph’s father, Jacob.
How was he fruitful?
He bore many children.
Joseph’s “branches extend over the wall.”
As Jacob’s offshoot,
Joseph is singled out
for a special blessing
superior to that of his brothers.
Why?
Joseph proved he had
the qualities needed for leadership.
However, of even greater value
than his abilities
was his being a spiritual man.
Let’s read verse 23:
“But the archers kept harassing him
and shot at him and kept harboring
animosity against him.”
“The archers kept harassing him.”
Who are “the archers”?
Joseph’s half brothers.
How?
They shot figuratively at Joseph
—arrows of envy and hatred
and jealousy were used to attack him.
Now, eventually,
his brothers sold him into slavery.
Now let’s read verse 24:
“And yet his bow remained in place,
“and his hands stayed strong and agile.
“This was from the hands
of the powerful one of Jacob,
from the shepherd, the stone of Israel.”
“His bow remained in place.”
How?
Despite the repeated attacks,
Joseph repaid animosity with kindness.
Joseph endured this ill-treatment
and did not weaken in his devotion to God.
Now we ask, How?
How is it that Joseph
kept a spiritual outlook
despite the harassment and animosity?
Let’s read verse 25:
“He [Joseph] is from the God of your father,
“and he will help you,
and he is with the Almighty,
“and he will bless you with the blessings
of the heavens above,
“with the blessings of the deep below,
with the blessings of the breasts and womb.”
“He is with the Almighty.”
Joseph had Jehovah’s help.
The Almighty was by his side through it all.
We’ve used our questions
to get the facts of the account,
but we’re not done.
Now let’s use them
to take our study to a spiritual plane.
Next, let’s ask a what question.
What does this account
teach us about Jehovah?
Jehovah never abandons his loyal servants.
Even in the depths of prison,
Joseph was not alone.
Jehovah found ways to bless Joseph.
Now make the connection
to Jehovah’s people today,
including yourself.
Jehovah will never abandon us.
Rather, he shows loyal love
to all those who serve him whole-souled.
Would Jehovah let Joseph
remain in prison indefinitely?
No.
At the appointed time, relief came.
Joseph was raised from a prisoner in chains
to the second most powerful man in Egypt
—from prison to palace in one day.
Make the connection to us.
Our trials are temporary.
Jehovah will soon bring relief,
even in unexpected or surprising ways.
Meanwhile, we are never alone;
Jehovah is with us.
Again, let’s ask the question, How?
How does the account
contribute to the Bible’s theme?
Joseph suffered, but his suffering led
to the survival of Abraham’s offspring,
leading to the Messiah.
Joseph’s account
is not just a riveting story.
It directly contributed
to the development of Jehovah’s purpose.
Think about this:
In spite of the poor conduct of his brothers,
Joseph forgave them and took the initiative
to improve their relationship with him.
Joseph’s attitude
was a reflection of Jehovah’s attitude.
With their family reunited,
Jehovah also forgave Joseph’s brothers
and took the initiative
in restoring their relationship with Himself.
In fact, Jehovah gave Joseph’s brother Judah
the honor of being
an ancestor of the Messiah.
What are the lessons in this account?
Let’s highlight just one.
Genesis 49:23:
“But the archers kept harassing him
and shot at him and kept harboring
animosity against him.”
Arrows of animosity were fired at Joseph.
Recall Joseph’s response in verse 24?
“And yet his bow remained in place,
and his hands stayed strong and agile.”
In other words, he did not return fire.
His bow remained in place.
Reflect on the last time
you were wronged by someone.
How did we react to what we experienced?
Did we seek to vindicate ourselves
or insist on our rights?
Did we fire arrows of animosity in return,
or did we show mercy and loyal love?
Did our reaction reveal
that God’s spirit was operative on us?
Like Joseph, we know
we will have Jehovah’s approval
even if we are wronged or experience trials
that make us feel like we are in prison.
Reflective questions like these
enable us to make the account our own.
It becomes part of us,
part of our way of thinking,
our way of acting.
This nourishes our relationship with Jehovah.
This type of study rewards us
not simply with a collection of facts
that impress us today
and are forgotten tomorrow.
Rather, it leaves us
with core principles that we remember,
that influence our decisions,
and that guide our lives.
We tighten our grip on the word of life.
Let’s review the fundamentals of study.
Again, this is not
about old methods or new methods
or about what device you are using.
This discussion transcends devices.
It’s about basic methods of Bible study.
We can liken these three phases of study
to gathering, sifting, and baking grain.
Gathering is when we read the Bible.
We don’t run through the field
grabbing just handfuls of grain;
we systematically harvest the field.
Sifting is when we sort out what we gathered,
answering who, what, where,
when, why, and how to get the facts.
Baking is when we think
—“turning up the heat” in our mind and heart—
something no one else can do for you.
The questions we ask
can take our study to a spiritual plane.
Most importantly,
what does this teach me about Jehovah?
How does it contribute to the Bible’s theme?
And the bottom line:
What is the lesson for me?
Jehovah gave us a mind
that is begging to learn.
It is a gift with the capacity
to cultivate thinking ability.
When we make the effort
to unearth gems from God’s Word,
we find that study
is rewarding and delightful.
More importantly, our study skills enable us
to keep a tight grip on the word of life.
A tight grip on God’s Word
will make our life better now
and give us the opportunity
to continue learning
about our heavenly Father for all eternity.